Anniversary Edition
To my surprise and delight, The Mythical Man-Month continues
to be popular after 20 years. Over 250,000 copies are in print.
People often ask which of the opinions and recommendations
set forth in 1975 I still hold, and which have changed, and how.
Whereas I have from time to time addressed that question in lec-
tures, I have long wanted to essay it in writing.
Peter Gordon, now a Publishing Partner at Addison-Wesley,
has been working with me patiently and helpfully since 1980.
He proposed that we prepare an Anniversary Edition. We de-
cided not to revise the original, but to reprint it untouched (ex-
cept for trivial corrections) and to augment it with more current
thoughts.
Chapter 16 reprints "No Silver Bullet: Essence and Acci-
dents of Software Engineering," a 1986 IFIPS paper that grew
out of my experience chairing a Defense Science Board study on
military software. My coauthors of that study, and our executive
secretary, Robert L. Patrick, were invaluable in bringing me
back into touch with real-world large software projects. The pa-
per was reprinted in 1987 in the IEEE Computer magazine, which
gave it wide circulation.
"No Silver Bullet" proved provocative. It predicted that a
decade would not see any programming technique that would
by itself bring an order-of-magnitude improvement in software
productivity. The decade has a year to run; my prediction seems
safe. "NSB" has stimulated more and more spirited discussion
Vll
viii Preface to the 20th Anniversary Edition
in the literature than has The Mythical Man-Month. Chapter 17,
therefore, comments on some of the published critique and up-
dates the opinions set forth in 1986.
In preparing my retrospective and update of The Mythical
Man-Month, I was struck by how few of the propositions as-
serted in it have been critiqued, proven, or disproven by on-
going software engineering research and experience. It proved
useful to me now to catalog those propositions in raw form,
stripped of supporting arguments and data. In hopes that these
bald statements will invite arguments and facts to prove, dis-
prove, update, or refine those propositions, I have included this
outline as Chapter 18.
Chapter 19 is the updating essay itself. The reader should
be warned that the new opinions are not nearly so well in-
formed by experience in the trenches as the original book was.
I have been at work in a university, not industry, and on small-
scale projects, not large ones. Since 1986, I have only taught
software engineering, not done research in it at all. My research
has rather been on virtual environments and their applications.
In preparing this retrospective, I have sought the current
views of friends who are indeed at work in software engineer-
ing. For a wonderful willingness to share views, to comment
thoughtfully on drafts, and to re-educate me, I am indebted to
Barry Boehm, Ken Brooks, Dick Case, James Coggins, Tom
DeMarco, Jim McCarthy, David Parnas, Earl Wheeler, and Ed-
ward Yourdon. Fay Ward has superbly handled the technical
production of the new chapters.
I thank Gordon Bell, Bruce Buchanan, Rick Hayes-Roth, my
colleagues on the Defense Science Board Task Force on Military
Software, and, most especially, David Parnas for their insights
and stimulating ideas for, and Rebekah Bierly for technical pro-
duction of, the paper printed here as Chapter 16. Analyzing the
software problem into the categories of essence and accident was
inspired by Nancy Greenwood Brooks, who used such analysis
in a paper on Suzuki violin pedagogy.
Preface to the 20th Anniversary Edition ix
Addison-Wesley's house custom did not permit me to ac-
knowledge in the preface to the 1975 edition the key roles
played by their staff. Two persons' contributions should be es-
pecially cited: Norman Stanton, then Executive Editor, and Her-
bert Boes, then Art Director. Boes developed the elegant style,
which one reviewer especially cited: "wide margins, [and] imag-
inative use of typeface and layout." More important, he also
made the crucial recommendation that every chapter have an
opening picture. (I had only the Tar Pit and Reims Cathedral at
the time.) Finding the pictures occasioned an extra year's work
for me, but I am eternally grateful for the counsel.
Soli Deo gloria—To God alone be glory.
Chapel Hill, N.C.. F. P. B., Jr.
March 1995
Preface to the
