14
Hatching a Catastrophe

14
Hatching a Catastrophe
None love the bearer of bad news.
How does a project get to be a year late?
. . , One day at a time.
SOPHOCLES
A. Canova, "Ercole e lica," 1802. Hercules hurls to his death the
messenger Lycas, who innocently brought the death-garment.
Scala/Art Resource, NY
153
154 Hatching a Catastrophe
When one hears of disastrous schedule slippage in a project, he
imagines that a series of major calamities must have befallen it.
Usually, however, the disaster is due to termites, not tornadoes;
and the schedule has slipped imperceptibly but inexorably. In-
deed, major calamities are easier to handle; one responds with
major force, radical reorganization, the invention of new ap-
proaches. The whole team rises to the occasion.
But the day-by-day slippage is harder to recognize, harder to
prevent, harder to make up. Yesterday a key man was sick, and a
meeting couldn't be held. Today the machines are all down, be-
cause lightning struck the building's power transformer. Tomor-
row the disk routines won't start testing, because the first disk is
a week late from the factory. Snow, jury duty, family problems,
emergency meetings with customers, executive audits—the list
goes on and on. Each one only postpones some activity by a
half-day or a day. And the schedule slips, one day at a time.
Milestones or Millstones?
How does one control a big project on a tight schedule? The first
step is to have a schedule. Each of a list of events, called milestones,
has a date. Picking the dates is an estimating problem, discussed
already and crucially dependent on experience.
For picking the milestones there is only one relevant rule.
Milestones must be concrete, specific, measurable events, defined
with knife-edge sharpness. Coding, for a counterexample, is "90
percent finished" for half of the total coding time. Debugging is
"99 percent complete" most of the time. "Planning complete" is
an event one can proclaim almost at will.1
Concrete milestones, on the other hand, are 100-percent
events. "Specifications signed by architects and implementers,"
"source coding 100 percent complete, keypunched, entered into
disk library," "debugged version passes all test cases." These con-
crete milestones demark the vague phases of planning, coding,
debugging.
"The Other Piece Is Late, Anyway" 155
It is more important that milestones be sharp-edged and un-
ambiguous than that they be easily verifiable by the boss. Rarely
will a man lie about milestone progress, if the milestone is so sharp
that he can't deceive himself. But if the milestone is fuzzy, the boss
often understands a different report from that which the man
gives. To supplement Sophocles, no one enjoys bearing bad news,
either, so it gets softened without any real intent to deceive.
Two interesting studies of estimating behavior by government
contractors on large-scale development projects show that:
1. Estimates of the length of an activity, made and revised care-
fully every two weeks before the activity starts, do not signifi-
cantly change as the start time draws near, no matter how
wrong they ultimately turn out to be.
2. During the activity, overestimates of duration come steadily
down as the activity proceeds.
3. Underestimates do not change significantly during the activity
until about three weeks before the scheduled completion.2
Sharp milestones are in fact a service to the team, and one they
can properly expect from a manager. The fuzzy milestone is the
harder burden to live with. It is in fact a millstone that grinds
down morale, for it deceives one about lost time until it is ir-
remediable. And chronic schedule slippage is a morale-killer.
"The Other Piece Is Late, Anyway"
A schedule slips a day; so what? Who gets excited about a one-day
slip? We can make it up later. And the other piece into which ours
fits is late, anyway.
A baseball manager recognizes a nonphysical talent, hustle, as
an essential gift of great players and great teams. It is the charac-
teristic of running faster than necessary, moving sooner than nec-
essary, trying harder than necessary. It is essential for great
programming teams, too. Hustle provides the cushion, the reserve
capacity, that enables a team to cope with routine mishaps, to
156 Hatching a Catastrophe
anticipate and forfend minor calamities. The calculated response,
the measured effort, are the wet blankets that dampen hustle. As
we have seen, one must get excited about a one-day slip. Such are
the elements of catastrophe.
But not all one-day slips are equally disastrous. So some calcu-
lation of response is necessary, though hustle be dampened. How
does one tell which slips matter? There is no substitute for a PERT
chart or a critical-path schedule. Such a network shows who waits
for what. It shows who is on the critical path, where any slip
moves the end date. It also shows how much an activity can slip
before it moves into the critical path.
The PERT technique, strictly speaking, is an elaboration of
critical-path scheduling in which one estimates three times for
every event, times corresponding to different probabilities of
meeting the estimated dates. I do not find this refinement to be
worth the extra effort, but for brevity I will call any critical path
network a PERT chart.
The preparation of a PERT chart is the most valuable part of
its use. Laying out the network, identifying the dependencies, and
estimating the legs all force a great deal of very specific planning
very early in a project. The first chart is always terrible, and one
invents and invents in making the second one.
As the project proceeds, the PERT chart provides the answer
to the demoralizing excuse, "The other piece is late anyhow." It
shows how hustle is needed to keep one's own part off the critical
path, and it suggests ways to make up the lost time in the other
part.
Under the Rug
When a first-line manager sees his small team slipping behind, he
is rarely inclined to run to the boss with this woe. The team might
be able to make it up, or he should be able to invent or reorganize
to solve the problem. Then why worry the boss with it? So far, so
Under the Rwg' 157
good. Solving such problems is exactly what the first-line manager
is there for. And the boss does have enough real worries demand-
ing his action that he doesn't seek others. So all the dirt gets swept
under the rug.
But every boss needs two kinds of information, exceptions to
plan that require action and a status picture for education.3 For
that purpose he needs to know the status of all his teams. Getting
a true picture of that status is hard.
The first-line manager's interests and those of the boss have
an inherent conflict here. The first-line manager fears that if he
reports his problem, the boss will act on it. Then his action will
preempt the manager's function, diminish his authority, foul up
his other plans. So as long as the manager thinks he can solve it
alone, he doesn't tell the boss.
Two rug-lifting techniques are open to the boss. Both must be
used. The first is to reduce the role conflict and inspire sharing of
status. The other is to yank the rug back.
Reducing the role conflict. The boss must first distinguish be-
tween action information and status information. He must disci-
pline himself not to act on problems his managers can solve, and
never to act on problems when he is explicitly reviewing status. I
once knew a boss who invariably picked up the phone to give
orders before the end of the first paragraph in a status report. That
response is guaranteed to squelch full disclosure.
Conversely, when the manager knows his boss will accept
status reports without panic or preemption, he comes to give hon-
est appraisals.
This whole process is helped if the boss labels meetings, re-
views, conferences, as status-review meetings versus problem-action
meetings, and controls himself accordingly. Obviously one may
call a problem-action meeting as a consequence of a status meet-
ing, if he believes a problem is out of hand. But at least everybody
knows what the score is, and the boss thinks twice before grabbing
the ball.
158 Hatching a Catastrophe
Yanking the rug off. Nevertheless, it is necessary to have review
techniques by which the true status is made known, whether
cooperatively or not. The PERT chart with its frequent sharp
milestones is the basis for such review. On a large project one may
want to review some part of it each week, making the rounds once
a month or so.
A report showing milestones and actual completions is the key
document. Figure 14.1 shows an excerpt from such a report. This
report shows some troubles. Specifications approval is overdue on
several components. Manual (SLR) approval is overdue on an-
other, and one is late getting out of the first state (Alpha) of the
independently conducted product test. So such a report serves as
an agenda for the meeting of 1 February. Everyone knows the
questions, and the component manager should be prepared to
explain why it's late, when it will be finished, what steps he's
taking, and what help, if any, he needs from the boss or collateral
groups.
V. Vyssotsky of Bell Telephone Laboratories adds the follow-
ing observation:
/ have found it handy to carry both "scheduled" and "estimated"
dates in the milestone report. The scheduled dates are the property of
the project manager and represent a consistent work plan for the
project as a whole, and one which is a priori a reasonable plan. The
estimated dates are the property of the lowest level manager who has
cognizance over the piece of work in question, and represents his best
judgment as to when it will actually happen, given the resources he
has available and when he received (or has commitments for delivery
of) his prerequisite inputs. The project manager has to keep his fingers
off the estimated dates, and put the emphasis on getting accurate,
unbiased estimates rather than palatable optimistic estimates or self-
protective conservative ones. Once this is clearly established in every-
one 's mind, the project manager can see quite a ways into the future
where he is going to be in trouble if he doesn 't do something. *
Under the Rug 159
160 Hatching a Catastrophe
The preparation of the PERT chart is a function of the boss
and the managers reporting to him. Its updating, revision, and
reporting requires the attention of a small (one to three man) staff
group which serves as an extension of the boss. Such a Plans and
Controls team is invaluable for a large project. It has no authority
except to ask all the line managers when they will have set or
changed milestones, and whether milestones have been met. Since
the Plans and Controls group handles all the paperwork, the bur-
den on the line managers is reduced to the essentials—making the
decisions.
We had a skilled, enthusiastic, and diplomatic Plans and Con-
trols group, run by A. M. Pietrasanta, who devoted considerable
inventive talent to devising effective but unobtrusive control
methods. As a result, I found his group to be widely respected and
more than tolerated. For a group whose role is inherently that of
an irritant, this is quite an accomplishment.
The investment of a modest amount of skilled effort in a Plans
and Controls function is very rewarding. It makes far more differ-
ence in project accomplishment than if these people worked di-
rectly on building the product programs. For the Plans and
Controls group is the watchdog who renders the imperceptible
delays visible and who points up the critical elements. It is the
early warning system against losing a year, one day at a time.
